---
title: "Config GitLab Repo for Staticman"
date: 2018-09-16T19:12:15+02:00
type: post
categories:
- blogging
tags:
- GitLab
- Staticman
toc: true
draft: false
---

To keep focused on the technical setup, please refer to
[the introduction](../0/) of this series for the reasons of choosing [Staticman]
and [GitLab].

### Goal

To set up _unauthenticated_ commenting system on [GitLab pages][gl_pages].

{{< beautifulfigure link="../goal.png" src="../goal800.png" title="Demo GitLab Page with Staticman v3" caption="Built on 14/09/2018" alt="GitLab Page with Staticman" >}}

This post aims at providing a walkthrough to the GitLab repo setup.  If you want to host your own Staticman API instance, you may refer to the
[next post in this series][next].

### Existing solution: GitHub mirror to GitLab

[Staticman] is a system which allows comments on static sites.  However, it
_was_ limited to GitHub.  Support for [GitLab] had been the _most_ wanted
feature for two years.

[Zongren] has proposed [a wonderful workaround][workaround] which makes use of
[GitHub webhooks][ghwh] and [GitLab triggers][gltrg].  However, that's _not_ a
genuine open source solution as it still depends on _proprietary_ [GitHub].
Some users find this [makes _no_ sense][no_sense] at all.

Thanks to [Nicolas Tsim's pull request][pr219], it's possible to run [Staticman]
with _native_ [GitLab] support.  If you're a free software purist, you may
download the source code of everything and host them yourself.

### Technical setup

This article assumes that you have

1. a GitLab repo (for your blog)
2. a dummy GitLab account (the "GitLab bot", you may use my bot
[@staticmanlab][staticmanlab].)
3. an instance of Staticman&nbsp;v3 API server holding the bot's person access
token.  (Again, you may use [my instance of the API server][staticman3] running
on a Heroku free dyno.)

In case of doubts, you may view

- [my demo project][demo] ([Source][demo_src])
- [my API instance][staticman3] ([Source][staticman3_src])

<i class="fas fa-info-circle fa-lg fa-pull-left" aria-hidden></i>
What #3 does is to send data from an HTML `<form>` (as a POST request) to the
API server, which instructs #2 the GitLab bot to create merge request to #1 the
GitLab repo for your blog.


<i class="fas fa-question-circle fa-lg fa-pull-left" aria-hidden></i>
If you're _unsure_ what my API instance do, I'll invite you to view
[its source code][staticman3_src].  In particular,
[my customizations against `staticman/dev` branch][staticman3_diff].

1. In your GitLab project page, go to **Settings → Members**.
2. Grant the GitLab bot "**developer**" access.

    **(Edited on Nov 18, 2018, as a follow-up to
    [halogenica/beautifulhugo#222][pr222])**

    According to the [setup guide in Staticman PR&nbsp;219][pr219], at this
    point, you'll be able to post comments.  ~~However, as can be seen from my
    comments, I stopped messing things up after including my OAuth application
    ID and secret for authenticated comments in config file `staticman.yml`.
    Even though I'm _not_ 100% sure if the steps 3--6 are required, I advise you
    following them.~~

    Steps 3--7 are _optional_ steps for _authenticated comments_.  You may
    **copy a suitable** `staticman.yml` **file from your blogging theme,
    change/delete the reCaptcha key, and **proceed with step&nbsp;8**.  (say,
    the one from [Beautiful Hugo][bh])

    {{< highlight yaml "linenos=inline" >}}
comments:
  allowedFields: ["name", "email", "website", "comment"]
  branch            : "master"
  commitMessage     : "New comment in {options.slug}"
  path: "data/comments/{options.slug}"
  filename          : "comment-{@timestamp}"
  format            : "yaml"
  moderation        : true
  requiredFields    : ['name', 'email', 'comment']
  transforms:
    email           : md5
  generatedFields:
    date:
      type          : "date"
      options:
        format      : "iso8601"
  reCaptcha:
    enabled: true
    siteKey: "6LeGeTgUAAAAAAqVrfTwox1kJQFdWl-mLzKasV0v"
    secret: "hsGjWtWHR4HK4pT7cUsWTArJdZDxxE2pkdg/ArwCguqYQrhuubjj3RS9C5qa8xu4cx/Y9EwHwAMEeXPCZbLR9eW1K9LshissvNcYFfC/b8KKb4deH4V1+oqJEk/JcoK6jp6Rr2nZV4rjDP9M7nunC3WR5UGwMIYb8kKhur9pAic="
{{< /highlight >}}


    For instance, you may view [my second demo site][demo2] (with
    [*proper* comment reply support][comment_rep]) and [its source][demo2_src].

3. Under your **account settings**, choose **Applicatons**.
4. Add a new application (for visitors to authenticate themselves on your site).

    | **Fields** | actions |
    | --- | --- |
    | **Name** | Whatever name you like, so that you can recognise it in the future. |
    | **Redirect URI** | Your blog URL; "localhost" for local testing |
    | **Scopes** | ☑ **api**, ☑ **read_repository** |

5. The **application ID** and **secret** should appear.
6. `GET /encrypt` application ID and secret.  You may enter the following URL in
the address bar of your web browser.

        https://<your-api-instance>/v3/encrypt/<text>

    You may replace `<your-api-instance>` and `<text>` with the domain name of
    your Staticman&nbsp;v3 API instance and the text to be encrypted
    respectively.  For example, if you're using my API instance, you may type

        https://staticman3.herokuapp.com/v3/encrypt/l3lsdh5

    and replace `l3lsdh5` with your actual application ID and secret.

7. Hook the API server and the bot up with the GitLab repo.

    Add the encrypted strings to your `staticman.yml`.  Replace the fields with
    yours.  You may view [my `staticman.yml`][myyml] as a reference.

    ```yaml
      gitlabAuth:
        clientId: phApfhlPYrReszwh9V...
        clientSecret: LyknknJah7mbYWtbcgET...
        redirectUri: http://vincenttam.gitlab.io/test-hugo-staticman/
    ```

    Add these lines (for generated fields) to this YML files as well to avoid
    `MISSING_FIELDS` error, or even copy the existing examples.

    ```yaml
      generatedFields:
        authType:
          type: user
          options:
            property: "type"
        email:
          type: user
          options:
            property: "email"
        username:
          type: user
          options:
            property: "username"
        name:
          type: user
          options:
            property: "name"
    ```

    The GitLab bot grabs this YML file for the API server to decide which fields
    to be written to your GitLab repo.  The target path inside the repo is
    determined by

    ```yaml
      # Destination path (directory) for the data files. Accepts placeholders.
      path: "data/comments/{options.slug}"
    ```

    <i class="fas fa-exclamation-circle fa-lg fa-pull-left" aria-hidden></i>
    [Staticman] is only responsible for delivering the comments from
    commentators to the site owner's designated `path` (inside the GitLab
    repo).  You have to consult your blog template's README / documentation in
    order to set up the `path` correctly for displaying comments.

8. Hook the HTML form up with the Staticman API server.

    Edit your site config file for your blog.  (The actual file name dependes on
    the generator.  [Hugo] calls it `config.toml`; [Jekyll] names it
    `_config.yml`.) Include the API address as well as the merge request target
    URL.  Actual setup can vary depending on your site generator/theme.

    However, the basic working principle is _universal_.  The `code` in the blog
    template's HTML `<form action="{{ code }}">` determines the recipient API
    server.  Take this blog's theme ([Beautiful Hugo][bh]) as an example.

        $ git grep '<form'
        layouts/partials/staticman-comments.html:<form class="js-form form" method="post
        " action="{{ .Site.Params.staticman.api }}">

    The code `.Site.Params.staticman.api` is found, meaning that Staticman's
    `api` has to be configured.

    In any case, the API URL in the form action has _comply with the new
    standard_ for the `/entry` endpoint.

        /v3/entry/:service/:username/:repository/:branch/:property

    - `:service`: currently supports `github` and `gitlab` (e.g. `gitlab`)
    - `:username`: your GitHub/GitLab user name (e.g. `vincenttam`)
    - `:repository`: your repository name (e.g. `test-hugo-staticman`)
    - `:branch`: the branch against which the GitHub/GitLab bot create pull/merge
    request (e.g. `master`)
    - `:property`: this matches exactly _one_ of the _unindented_ lines in
    `staticman.yml`.  See its top comment block to know more.

9. (Optional) Set up reCAPTCHA to stop SPAM / machine generated comments.

    [Beautiful Hugo][bh]'s README provided a simple way to set up the site
    config files.  However, the author of this README simply put reCAPTCHA's
    `secret` field. _without_ further explanations.  In fact, according the
    [official documentation about `staticman.yml`][ymldoc], this `secret` field
    _should_ be `/encrypt`ed like the application ID in step&nbsp;#4.

    In `staticman.yml`:

    ```yaml
      reCaptcha:
        enabled: true
        siteKey: "6LeGeTgUAAAAAAqVrfTwox1kJQFdWl-mLzKasV0v"
        secret: "hsGjWtWHR4H...ur9pAic="
    ```

    In `config.toml`:

    ```toml
    [Params.staticman.recaptcha]
      sitekey = "6LeGeTgUAAAAAAqVrfTwox1kJQFdWl-mLzKasV0v"
      secret = "hsGjWtWHR4H...ur9pAic="
    ```

<i class="fas fa-exclamation-triangle fa-lg fa-pull-left" aria-hidden></i>
Use my API instance for _testing and educational_ purposes only.  _Never_ use it
for production since Heroku free dynos _aren't_  for that.  (Free dynos idle
after 30&nbsp;minutes of inactivity.)

| config file | intepreted by | function |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `(_)?config.*` | static site generator | The blog uses this to send form to the API. |
| `staticman.yml` | Staticman API server | The GitLab bot creates merge requests according to this file. |

### Usage

1. Now, you should be able ot submit comments by clicking
<input type="submit" value="submit">.
2. To approve them comment, log in the site owner's GitLab account, go to your
repo page and click **Merge Requests**.
3. Accept comment?

    | decision | action |
    | --- | --- |
    | ✓ | merge, ☑ delete source branch |
    | ✗ | close |

4. Wait until the site rebuild finishes.  (You may view the progress in
**CI / CD → Pipelines**.)

### Additional feature: posting _without_ approval

Provided that the target audience of the blog is somebody you trust (say, your
colleagues), you may want their comments instantly available after the site
rebuild _without_ your approval.

Since `master` branch is a protected branch by default, the site owner has to
grant rights for "developers" to merge and to push against `master` branch.

1. Go to the repo's **Settings ➔ Repository** .
2. In **Protected branches**, at the row representing `master` branch, for each
drop-down list, _uncheck "Masters" and check "Developers + Masters"_.

### References

1. [Staticman pull request&nbsp;#219][pr219]
2. [GitLab permission table][gl_perm]
3. [Staticman issue&nbsp;#22][issue22]

[GitLab]: https://gitlab.com
[GitHub]: https://github.com
[Staticman]: https://staticman.net
[gl_pages]: https://about.gitlab.com/features/pages/
[workaround]: https://zongren.me/2016/09/23/use-staticman-in-gitlab-pages/
[staticmanlab]: https://gitlab.com/staticmanlab
[demo]: https://vincenttam.gitlab.io/test-hugo-staticman
[demo_src]: https://gitlab.com/VincentTam/test-hugo-staticman
[pr219]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/pull/219
[gl_perm]: https://docs.gitlab.com/ce/user/permissions.html
[issue22]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/issues/22
[Zongren]: https://github.com/zongren
[ghwh]: https://developer.github.com/webhooks/
[gltrg]: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/build_triggers.html
[no_sense]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/issues/22#issuecomment-331734283
[staticman3]: https://staticman3.herokuapp.com
[staticman3_src]: https://github.com/VincentTam/staticman/tree/deploy
[staticman3_diff]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/compare/dev...VincentTam:deploy
[myyml]: https://gitlab.com/VincentTam/test-hugo-staticman/blob/master/staticman.yml
[Hugo]: https://gohugo.io/
[bh]: https://github.com/halogenica/beautifulhugo
[Jekyll]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[ymldoc]: https://staticman.net/docs/configuration
[next]: /post/2018-09-16-staticman-powered-gitlab-pages/2/
[pr222]: https://github.com/halogenica/beautifulhugo/pull/222
[comment_rep]: /post/2018-11-17-nested-comments-in-beautiful-hugo/
[demo2]: https://vincenttam.gitlab.io/bhdemo
[demo2_src]: https://gitlab.com/vincenttam/bhdemo
