---
title: "Staticman API Hosting 2018"
subtitle: "Step-by-step guide for free-hosting on Heroku"
date: 2018-09-17T22:00:07+02:00
type: post
categories:
- blogging
tags:
- GitLab
- Staticman
toc: true
draft: false
---

### Goal

To host an instance of Staticman&nbsp;v3 server on Heroku.

This post involves _server-side_ setup of the commenting system.  If you simply
want to have a taste of this system on GitLab, you may

- try [my demo GitLab Page][demo], and/or
- configure your GitLab repo (for your static web site) with
[my API instance][myapi].  See [the previous post in this series](../1) for a
tutorial.

I try to address some concerns about this API service in the
[introduction of this series](../0) to keep this page focused on the _technical_
aspects of [my customizations against `staticman/dev` branch][staticman3_diff].

Disclaimer: This post involves creating and transferring confidential info.
Store them in a secure place to unavoid unauthorized access to your server,
GitHub and/or GitLab accounts.  Like _all_ community guides, there's _no_
guarantee nor liability for any loss of data.

### Overview

1. Grab [Staticman] as a Node.js app from its GitHub repo.
2. Fill in an RSA private key and your personal access token for GitHub/GitLab
in the site config JSON file.
3. Deploy the app to your web app host.

### Stage 1: prerequisites

1. A clone of [Staticman]:

        $ git clone https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman

2. Access to a web app host.  I'm using a free [Heroku] account.

    If you decide to set up your _own_ server, please:
    1. understand all the (Linux, networking, database, etc) _basics_ (to open
    up only necessary services/ports to external users).
    2. aware of the (fire) safety requirements (as your server is usually online
    24 / 7)
    3. calculate the annual electricity fee from the workstation's power
    consumption and compare it with the cost of renting a server.

    If you're using [Heroku], download Heroku's CLI.  On Debian-based systems,
    installing it as a snap software should be the _easiest_ option.

3. An RSA _private_ key  (`ssh-keygen` _doesn't_ work here.)

        $ openssl genrsa -out key.pem

    This is needed for the encryption of secrets so that they can be published
    (to a remote Git repo).

4. GitLab and/or GitHub personal access token(s) of a _dummy_ account (_not_ your
personal account)
    - GitLab: configured with scopes `api` and `read_repositories`.
    - GitHub: with write access to user's repo

    You may create a new (personal, work or organization) account for that.

    It's safer to grant access to _some_ personal repo's to a bot than to expose
    them _all_ to the API.

### Stage 2: project config

If you _can_ securely copy files (using `scp`, `rsync` with SSH remote, etc),
you may directly include your confidential info your JSON config file
`config.production.json`.

{{< highlight json >}}
{
  "gitlabToken": "YOUR_GITLAB_TOKEN",
  "githubToken": "YOUR_GITHUB_TOKEN",
  "rsaPrivateKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY\n-----YOUR_KEY-----\nEND RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
  "port": 8080
}
{{< /highlight >}}

Nicholas Tsim, the developer of Staticman's v3 GitLab support, suggests
[using a modern text editor][editrsa] to edit `rsaPrivateKey`. (e.g. Sublime
Text 3)

On [Heroku], the `port` parameter is _redundant_ since it's dynamically
attributed to each application.

---

Some free web app host (e.g. [Heroku]) _doesn't_ provide such access.  To
_publish_ your JSON config file `config.production.json`, _store your secrets
with environment variables_, and access them with `process.env` in your JSON
file and Node.js code.  (I've learnt this skill thanks to [Flying Grizzly's
Staticman server guide][flying].)

1. Log in the Heroku CLI.

        $ heroku login

    You'll be prompted to enter user name and the password.

2. Change to the directory of the cloned repo.

        $ cd ~/staticman

3. Create file `Procfile` _at root level_ containing one simple line: `web: npm
start`.
4. Create your project on Heroku (for storing environmental variables).

        $ heroku create <app_name>

    If `app_name` is omitted, then the system will attribute a random
    alphanumeric-hyphenated pronounceable name.

5. Set your environment variables for Staticman: `GITHUB_TOKEN`, `GITLAB_TOKEN`,
`RSA_PRIVATE_KEY` and `NODE_ENV`.

        $ heroku config:set key=value

    For example,

        $ heroku config:set NODE_ENV="production"

    During the setup, I find the most difficult point is to _correctly_ pass the
    _multi-lined_ RSA _private_ key to the shell variable.  I tried copying and
    pasting the string

        -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY\n-----YOUR_KEY-----\nEND RSA PRIVATE KEY-----

    in the shell emulator and issuing the `heroku` command with the pasted
    string wrapped in double quotes.

        $ heroku config:set RSA_PRIVATE_KEY="....\n.....\n......."

    However, `heroku logs --tail` kept complaining that the "RSA key is _not_ in
    the correct format".  I almost wanted to give the whole thing up.  <time
    datetime="2018-09-14">Last Friday</time>, after a day of fruitless
    searching, I finally came up with a solution.

        $ heroku config:set RSA_PRIVATE_KEY="$(cat key.pem)"
        Setting RSA_PRIVATE_KEY and restarting ⬢ staticman3... done, v7
        RSA_PRIVATE_KEY: -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
        MIIEpAIBAAKCAQEAvUhs53CsnRfovlgZOg0rcC/lUPXUV2rs9gK3oU+ICzamJX9B
        ...
        EPvidr9qCEQxITeOVj8gZ3MjyyRohxkiqbcSI9ceqh6Ellp82R4NEA==
        -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----

    The command in the bracket is executed first.  The output (the RSA _private_
    key) is captured inside the double quotes `"..."`.  To make the whole
    _multi-line_ string JSON-friendly, the static function `JSON.stringify` is
    called.

6. Create your `config.production.json`.

    ```json
    {
      "gitlabToken": process.env.GITLAB_TOKEN,
      "githubToken": process.env.GITHUB_TOKEN,
      "rsaPrivateKey": JSON.stringify(process.env.RSA_PRIVATE_KEY),
      "port": 8080
    }
    ```

    In [Heroku], the `port` is _dynamically_ attributed to each web app, so it's
    _useless_ to set this parameter.  However, I just leave it there and there's
    no complaint from the machines.  You may try omitting that. I would be happy
    to know if that also works well.

    For a complete list of API configuration variables, you may consult
    [Staticman's official API documentation][staticman_doc].  This is useful
    when you need to incorporate a _third-party_ service (e.g. Akismet, Mailgun).

    Optional: If you're running on a self-hosted GitHub/GitLab, it's possible
    to set up `git***BaseUrl`, which defaults to `https://git***.com/`.

7. Create branch `production` from remote branch `dev`.  (Staticman v3 is still
under testing and development, but its GitLab support has already been merged
against branch `dev`.)

        $ git checkout -b production origin/dev

8. Add `config.production.json` to the exception of `.gitignore`.

        $ echo "!config.production.json" >> .gitignore

9. Commit the changes against the newly created branch.

        $ git add config.production.json Procfile .gitignore
        $ git commit -m "Set up Staticman v3 for deployment to Heroku"

### Stage 3: deployment to server

The basic idea is to _securely_ transfer the configuration and application files
to a web app host, on which `npm start` will be run to start the service.  Part
of this section is specific to [Heroku].  You may adapt it according to your own
needs.

Push your local `production` branch against the remote `master` branch.
(Builds are _limited to `master` branch only_.)

    $ git push heroku production:master

You may refer to the [source code of my API instance][myapi-src] for details.

---

If you can transfer your confidential files in a secure way, you may try

    $ rsync -auvz ./* <username>@<ssh-remote>:/path/to/your/directory/

That will simplify the file transfer.

- `-a`: preserve the file attributes, access time, etc
- `-u`: only update file if the target file's `-mtime` is less recent than the
source file.
- `-v`: verbose, for inspecting our work
- `-z`: compress the data, useful in case of large file transfer

Then on your server, run

    $ npm install

Set environment variable `NODE_ENV` to be `production`.

    $ export NODE_ENV="production"

Finally, run the server.

    $ npm start

    > staticman@3.0.0 prestart /app
    > if [ ! -d node_modules ]; then npm install; fi


    > staticman@3.0.0 start /app
    > node index.js

    Staticman API running on port 8080

Some port forwarding is needed so that the developers using this API _don't_ need to key the port number.  However, I _don't_ know how to do so.

### References

1. [Staticman PR #219][pr219]
2. [Flying Grizzly's server setup guide][flying]
3. [Heroku's Node.js deployment guide][heroku_guide]

[Staticman]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman
[Heroku]: https://www.heroku.com/home
[demo]: https://vincenttam.gitlab.io/test-hugo-staticman/posts/test-staticman/
[myapi]: https://staticman3.herokuapp.com/
[myapi-src]: https://github.com/VincentTam/staticman/tree/deploy
[pr219]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/pull/219
[flying]: https://www.flyinggrizzly.net/2017/12/setting-up-staticman-server/
[editrsa]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/pull/219#issuecomment-419638262
[heroku_guide]: https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/deploying-nodejs
[staticman_doc]: https://staticman.net/docs/api
[staticman3_diff]: https://github.com/eduardoboucas/staticman/compare/dev...VincentTam:deploy
